0. Disclaimer

ThingLab II is a research prototype and, as such, it's goal is to 
demonstrate concepts rather than to provide the world with a 
polished user interface construction tool. Thus, while we have tried 
to make it usable, it still has obvious  blemishes and missing features  
and probably numerous bugs. We hope that you will see in ThingLab 
II the potential usefulness of constraints rather than the limitations 
of a particular system.

This manual was, of necessity, written in haste. We hope that this, 
too, will be forgiven. The alternative was to provide no manual at 
all!

1. Introduction

ThingLab II supports the exploration of constraint-based user 
interfaces. It consists of a set of classes that define constraints and 
constrainable objects called things. It also includes an incremental 
constraint satisfier, a module compiler, a construction-set style user 
interface, various tools, and an extensible set of primitive user 
interface building blocks.

ThingLab II uses the dataflow constraint model. In this model, a 
constraint is a collection of functions that use some subset of the 
constrained variables as inputs and compute the remainder as 
outputs. Each of these functions, called constraint methods (or 
methods, for short), can be executed to enforce the relationship 
represented by the constraint. For example, the constraint:

	a = b + c

has three constraint methods:

	a := b + c
	b := a - c
	c  := a - b.

Dataflow constraints can be used over a wide range of data types. 
For example, ThingLab II includes constraints that operate on 
numbers, bitmaps, strings, and lists. Dataflow constraints can also 
be executed efficiently. However, they are not as powerful as some 
other kinds of constraints. For example, they cannot be used for 
linear programming, linear algebra, or scheduling problems. 
Furthermore, the particular dataflow constraint solver in ThingLab 
II cannot handle inequality constraints such as "x < 10" and is not 
guaranteed to find a solution if the constraint graph contains cycles. 
These limitations, along with the decision to use dataflow 
constraints in the first place, represent deliberate engineering 
choices. We believe that dataflow constraints, even with our 
restrictions, are sufficiently powerful for most user interface 
applications and the restrictions permit them to be implemented 
extremely efficiently. However, it is important to keep its limitations 
in mind to avoid asking ThingLab II to solve problems that it was not 
designed to handle.

The remainder of this manual presents a tutorial example, expands 
upon some of the basic concepts of ThingLab II, and briefly describes 
how to operate some of the tools. An appendix describes how to file 
ThingLab II into a Smalltalk-80 image.

2. Getting Started

To get started, invoke the "ThingLabII Parts Bin" item in the 
background menu. This gives you a view (i.e. a window) on the root 
of the parts bin hierarchy. There is initially only one parts bin, "All 
Parts," containing all the primitive Things. The "All Parts" bin will be 
updated as you work to contain all new Things you create. Open "All 
Parts" by selecting it and using the "open" menu item or by double-
clicking. You should see a bunch of named icons like PointThing, 
LineThing, Sum, and MidPoint. These are primitive things.

Hint: Because the Mac mouse has only one button you can get the 
middle-button (yellow) menu by pressing the red button over the title 
area of a ThingLabII window. The right-button (blue) menu is also 
available in the gray area around the title. This shortcut is not very 
useful on machines with three button mice!

Now create a new, empty thing by invoking the "new thing" menu 
item in one of the parts bin windows. Note that the new thing is 
given a unique name such as "Thing1" and an icon for it appears in 
"All Parts." The new thing's name and default icon may both be 
changed, if desired, by selecting the thing's icon in "All Parts" and 
invoking the appropriate operation from the menu.

Components are added to the new thing by dragging them from a 
parts bin into the thing construction view. There is a modal dialogue 
involved when inserting new components. After you've dragged a 
group of components into the target thing and released the mouse 
button, the system expects you to specify where to place the parts by 
clicking the mouse once for each part. Add HLine and VLine things to 
the new thing and then pick up the endpoint of one of the lines with 
the mouse and move it around. You will notice a heavy black square 
appear when you move the point over any other point. This indicates 
that the points may be glued together ("merged"). If you release the 
mouse at this point, the merge will be done. You should now be able 
to construct simple polygons and rectangles (using LineThings, 
HLines, and VLines). Try it.

3. Concepts

Things

The primitive elements of the ThingLabII constraint programming 
system are variables and constraints. The unit of encapsulation used 
to assemble these elements into higher-level objects is the thing. A 
thing has a collection of parts, where each part is either a primitive 
variable or another thing. For example, a Node thing is composed of 
a primitive variable named ‘value’ and a Point thing named 
‘location’. This Point thing is in turn composed of two primitive 
variables, named ‘x’ and ‘y’. In addition to its parts, a thing may also 
have a set of constraints that define relationships among its parts 
and subparts. For example, a HLine thing has such a constraint 
stating that the y values of its two endpoint Point things should be 
equal.

Cloning

New instances of things are created by copying an existing instance 
called the prototype. When a thing is copied, its structure of parts 
and subparts is copied all the way down to the leaves and its 
constraints are copied and installed in the new thing. The copying 
process is called cloning. A new kind of thing is created by starting 
with a new, empty thing, copying previously created things into it, 
and connecting these things together with constraints. The resulting 
object is then the prototype for the new type of thing.

Merging

Identity relationships between parts of a thing may be established via 
merges. A merge, which may be thought of as a special sort of 
constraint, equates two subpart trees so that they become a single, 
shared part. After two subparts are merged, all constraints from the 
original subparts are applied to the new shared part. For example, 
the endpoints of two Line things might be merged. If the merged 
point is then dragged, both lines will be affected. Furthermore, if one 
of the original Line things was constrained to be horizontal and the 
other was constrained to be vertical, the merged point will now be 
governed by both constraints.

The Construction Kit Metaphor

The construction kit metaphor for thing construction has proven to 
be a powerful mechanism for packaging and reusing constraint 
“programs.” For example, a Quadrilateral may be constructed from 
four Line things. The Quadrilateral may be turned into a Rectangle 
by adding two horizontal and two vertical constraints. A center may 
be added by stretching a MidPoint thing across the diagonal. Finally, 
the centers and corners of several instances of the resulting 
CenterRectangle may be combined with additional vertical and 
horizontal constraints to produce a set of aligned boxes for a 
diagram or a paned-window layout. Note that many of the 
intermediate stages in this construction — Quadrilaterals, 
Rectangles, and CenterRectangles — are re-usable objects in their 
own right.

Symbolic Strengths

Constraint strengths are specified using Symbol objects such as 
#required. These are converted into Strength objects in various data 
structures. Class Strength keeps a table in a class variable that maps 
symbolic names to their indices in the table, which are used to order 
the set of Strengths. It is possible to insert new symbolic strengths 
into this table by modifying and then invoking Strength's class 
initialization method.

Constraints

Constraints may be defined either by using an equation:

	Constraint
		symbols: #(a b c)
		equation: 'a = (b + c)'

or by explicitly listing its constraint methods:

	Constraint
		symbols: #(a b c)
		methodStrings: #(
			'a := b + c'
			'b := a - c'
			'c := a - b')

In this example, the resulting constraints would be identical. The first 
form is preferred as it is compact and easy to read. There are times, 
however, when the equation translator cannot find an inverse 
function (such as when operating on bitmaps) or when one wishes to 
make a one-directional constraint. In these situations one must 
resort to the second form.

Note the parenthesis in the equation string in the first form. These 
are necessary so that the top-level expression passed to the equation 
translator is the "=" message send. If the parenthesis were 
eliminated the top level expression would be the "+" message send, 
since Smalltalk is evaluated left to right, and the equation translator 
would complain. (This is a blemish; it would be easy to make the 
equation translator figure this out for itself.)

Binding Constraints to Variables

Constraints are bound to their constrained objects using Reference 
objects. A Reference is a rooted symbolic path to a part or subpart of 
a thing. The "->" message can be sent to any thing to create a 
reference to one of its parts. For example: "myThing->#line1.p1.x". 
Note that the sequence of subpart names, "line1," "p1," and "x," are 
represented as a single Symbol object. The symbol is broken into 
components at the period characters when the Reference is created. 
In some contexts, the root thing is implied, as in:

	aThing require: #node.location.x equals: #box.center.x

A previously created, unbound constraint may be bound to a set of 
variable references using the message "bind:strength:", as in:

	midPointConstraint
		bind: (Array
			with: self->#topLeft.x
			with: self->#center.x
			with: self->#bottomRight.x)
		strength: #required

Note that the strength must also be specified when a constraint is 
bound. Often, constraints are bound when they are created, as in:

	Constraint
		symbols: #(p1 midpoint p2)
		equation: '(p1 + p2) // 2 = midpoint'
		bind: (Array
			with: mpThing->#p1.y
			with: mpThing->#midpoint.y
			with: mpThing->#p2.y)
		strength: #stronglyPreferred

There are a number of shorthand forms for constructing and adding 
constraints to a thing, such as this example from the MidPoint 
primitive thing:

	mpThing
		stronglyPrefer: '(p1 + p2) // 2 = midpoint'
		where: #((p1 p1.y) (midpoint midpoint.y) (p2 p2.y))

Note that the strength is encoded in message selector and that the 
symbolic variable names and their paths (relative to root "mpThing") 
are compactly specified in the "where:" clause. Many other shorthand 
forms can be found be browsing the protocols for Thing.

Adding and Removing Constraints

Confusing as it is likely to be, there are two senses in which 
constraints are added and removed. First, they are added to and 
removed from the constraint graph. A constraint does nothing, even 
after it has been bound to its variables, until it is added to the 
constraint graph with the message:

	aConstraint addConstraint

It can be deactivated again by sending it the message:

	aConstraint removeConstraint

The other sense in which constraints are added and removed has to 
do with them being owned by a thing. Any thing may own a set of 
constraints, and those constraints are cloned when the thing is 
cloned. Constraints attached to parts of the thing but not owned by it, 
such as mouse constraints, are not cloned with the thing. Constraints 
may be added to and removed from things using the following 
messages:

	aThing addConstraint: mpConstraint
	aThing removeConstraint: mpConstraint

Adding a constraint to a thing also adds it to the constraint graph as 
a side effect. (This sounds more confusing than it really is.)

Planning

One of the strengths of ThingLab II is the performance of its 
incremental constraint satisfaction planner. Constraint satisfaction 
is cheap enough that one may add and remove constraints 
dynamically and, in fact, the ThingLabII user interface does exactly 
this as the user interacts with the system. The incremental planner 
maintains a data flow graph among the constraints as constraints 
are added and removed. The dataflow graph represents a locally-
predicate-better solution to the current set of constraints. (Since 
there may be conflicts between constraints and some constraints are 
stronger than others, not all the constraints will necessarily be 
satisfied. For details on how and why the constraint satisfier works, 
refer to the CACM article.)

The dataflow graph can be reduced to a linear list of constraint 
methods called a plan. The methods of the plan are executed in order 
to compute a solution to the current set of constraints. In the original 
ThingLab, this list of methods would have been compiled into a 
Smalltalk method. Although the code generated was quite fast, the 
compilation process itself was expensive and had to be repeated each 
time the constraint graph was modified.

Module Compilation

Unlike the original ThingLab, ThingLabII does not normally compile 
plans into Smalltalk methods. However, when a given thing has 
been developed to the point of stability and would be useful as a 
building block for constructing other things, it may be compiled into a 
module. A module behaves externally like the thing from which it 
was compiled, but with better performance. All possible plans for 
satisfying the module's internal constraints are pre-computed, 
optimized, and compiled into Smalltalk methods. The module's 
planning behavior is similarly pre-computed so that it appears to the 
planner to have only a single (albeit complex) internal constraint.

Constructing Things

New kinds of things may be constructed either by using the direct-
manipulation interface or by writing a program to do the 
construction. A program can do anything that can be done using the 
direct-manipulation interface plus various things which are 
awkward to do via direct manipulation, such as using nested loops to 
interconnect an array of components with regular structure (e.g. 
laying out a chess board). The direct-manipulation interface is also 
not a good vehicle for adding constraints that are not built into some 
graphical object, since there is no way to view and manipulate these 
“invisible” constraints. The demo classes are examples of how to 
construct things using programs.

Adding Primitive Things

A new primitive thing is added by creating a new subclass of 
PrimitiveThing. Three initialization methods are used to define the 
structure of the new thing:

	initializeStructure,
	initializeConstraints, and
	initializeValues.

The parts of the thing are defined in initializeStructure. Any part that 
holds a thing must be initialized here. Instance variables not 
initialized to be things are assumed to hold non-thing values which 
do not need to be recursively copied during cloning. Constraints are 
defined in initializeConstraints. Finally, initial values are declared in 
initializeValues. Any of these initialization methods may be omitted if 
desired; the default behavior is to do nothing.

By convention, all primitive things have a class initialization method 
that initializes their icon bitmap for the parts bin and their 
explanation string. The class initialization method must do "self 
initializePrimitive" before doing anything else. If the class 
initialization method is omitted, a default method provides a generic 
icon bitmap and explanation string.

If the new primitive is to have custom appearance, it must supply a 
display method and various other glyph protocol methods. Likewise, 
if it to have custom mouse or keyboard input behavior, it must supply 
methods to support this behavior. Unfortunately, although it is not 
difficult, it is beyond the scope of the introductory manual to describe 
in detail how to add such behavior. The best way to learn how to do 
it is to read the comments in class Thing and study the supplied 
primitive things.

Time and State

ThingLabII captures the notion of state changes in time via a 
mechanism called history variables. A history variable stores not only 
its current value, but some fixed number of past values as well. 
Constraints may refer to the values of previous states but may not 
alter them. This forces time to always move forward and allows the 
implementation to truncate histories at some reasonable limit. A 
system clock advances the histories of all history variables in a given 
thing as a single atomic operation.

This simple model allows one to elegantly express time-dependent 
behavior. For example, a time-varying variable can be integrated by 
using a Sum constraint to add its current value to the previous value 
of the variable containing the integral. Similarly, the discrete-time 
derivative of a time-dependent variable can be computed by taking 
the difference between successive states. More relevant to user 
interface construction, one can build finite state machines for 
processing user inputs or producing simple animations. As another 
example, the browser demo uses the history mechanism to pre-select 
the most recently selected message category and message pane 
selections, if possible, when the class pane selection is changed.

Constraints and Imperative Code

A user interface must inform the application program of user actions. 
Similarly, the application program will take actions, autonomously 
or in response to user actions, that will effect the graphical objects 
visible in the user interface.

It is best to think of the world in two parts: the world of constraints 
and constrained variables (the constraint world) and the less 
disciplined world of normal Smalltalk programs (the imperative 
world). The imperative world is in control but interacts with the 
constraint world by:

	1. instantiating a set of variables,
	2. adding and removing constraints on those variable,
	3. examining the values of constrained variables,
	4. changing the values of constrained variables, and
	5. invoking the constraint satisfaction machinery.

Interacting with the graphical objects of a user interface occurs 
through a Smalltalk View-Controller pair that knows about the 
constraint world. For example, moving a point causes mouse 
constraints to be added to the point, all constraints to be repeatedly 
satisfied as the mouse moves, and the mouse constraints to be 
removed at the end of the interaction. The ThingLab II user interface 
framework has hooks that allows custom widgets, such as sliders 
and buttons, to be handled in a similar manner. Thus, the ThingLab II 
UI is simply a special imperative program that interacts with the 
constraint world.

The application program may also interact with the constraint 
world. The rules for this are simple. Any variable may be examined 
at any time. However, the application must be only change the 
values of variables in a way that allows constraints on the variable 
to be kept satisfied as well as possible. One way to do this is with the 
set:to:strength: message. For example, one could write:

	p set: #x to: 15 strength: #preferred

This statement can be read: “I would prefer that the x part of point p 
be 15 now.” It is implemented by adding an edit constraint with a 
strength of preferred to the x part of p and invoking the planner. If 
the planner finds a way to satisfy the edit constraint, then the value 
of x is changed and the plan is executed; otherwise, the value of x is 
left unchanged. Finally, the edit constraint is removed.

Because the set:to:strength: mechanism invokes the planner twice 
(once to add and once to remove the edit constraint) it is not efficient 
if a sequence of changes must be made to the same variable, such as 
during an animation sequence or a drag interaction. In such cases, 
the client program must add edit constraints for all variables that 
will be changed, extract a plan, and invoke the plan after every set of 
variable change. This is how the dragging is implemented in the 
ThingLab II UI.

The mechanisms just described are clearly not as easy to use as one 
would like and should be thought of as work in progress. Many of 
the issues raised will be addressed in Bjorn Freeman-Benson’s thesis 
on constraint-imperative programming.

4. The User Interface

Gestures

The system recognizes several different gestures made with the 
mouse, namely: click, double-click, and drag. All gestures are made 
with the red button of the mouse and possibly the shift key, and are 
context sensitive.

A drag occurs when the mouse button is held down longer than about 
a quarter second. A special kind of drag, called a "sweep", is made by 
moving the mouse down and right quickly during the initial mouse 
press. This is used for the "area select" operation.

Selecting

The system maintains a list of selected objects which are used as 
arguments to menu commands or input actions. Sweeping is used to 
select multiple objects to operated on, with feedback given by 
drawing a temporary rectangle around the area to be selected. Shift-
clicking or shift-sweeping toggles the selection of the designated 
objects. Clicking over an object makes it the only thing selected. 
Clicking over the background clears the entire selection. Double 
clicking over an object "opens" it. (This is an example of gesture 
whose meaning varies with context. In the parts bin, opening an 
parts bin brings up a new window containing its contents while 
opening a thing brings up an editor on the thing. In a thing editor 
window, double-clicking on a part brings up an inspector window on 
the part.) Double- clicking over the background does a select-all 
operation. Non-sweep drag gestures over the background are used 
for the "scroll" operation (reflected by a little hand cursor). All 
operations except moving and selecting objects can also be invoked 
via the menu.

Parts Bins

Primitive and previously constructed things are kept in a set of 
hierarchically nested, iconic parts bins. The root of the hierarchy is 
called “Top Bin”. A special bin called “All Parts” contains icons for all 
primitive and constructed things in the system and is the only parts 
bin from which a thing may be deleted from the system. The user may 
construct additional parts bins to organize his set of things as 
desired. The icon for a given thing may reside in any number of parts 
bins, allowing Things to be cross filed in a number of bins.

Editing Things

Most Things may be moved by dragging them with the mouse. 
Several objects may be selected and dragged together. Such 
interactions are accomplished by adding mouse constraints to the 
location parts of the objects to be moved. If any of these locations is 
fixed by a constraint of higher strength, that object cannot be moved. 
It is possible to increase the strength of the mouse constraints using 
the ThingLab II Control Panel. This is useful when one wishes to 
move the PointAnchor.

Editing non-graphical values not quite so obvious. You specify 
numbers by selecting one or more NumberPrinter or 
NumberDisplayer things and typing digits. Constraints are 
resatisfied as you type. Backspace deletes the last digit, the minus 
sign changes the sign, and the period may be used to input floating 
point quantities. Strings may by typed into TextThings in a similar 
manner.

To draw bits into a FormDisplayer, use the yellow button (the red 
button is used to select and move it). You may also bring up a fat-bits 
editor on the form by using shift-yellow button.

As a last resort, you can edit the value of an object using a Smalltalk 
inspector. This goes outside the normal constraint world, however, 
so constraint satisfaction will not occur until you do something else 
to trigger it. You can open an inspector by selecting a single object 
and invoking the "inspect" menu item or by double-clicking over the 
object. If there is no selection, invoking the "inspect" menu item will 
open an inspector on the top-level thing.

Using Custom Constraints

A custom constraint allows the user to define a new constraint 
directly from the direct manipulation interface. There are two-, 
three-, and four-variable custom constraints. Initially, a custom 
constraint does not constraint its variables in any way. Shift-clicking 
on the custom constraint brings up a Constraint Definer view. The 
user types in the methods of the constraint separated by blank lines. A 
method consists of one or more assignment statements. The 
constrained variables listed at the top of the view should be used in 
these statements. It is also allowable to reference global variables 
such as "Transcript". When done, the use invokes "accept" from the 
menu and the constraint is installed. Since the constraint is usually 
executed as soon as it is installed, the user should be sure that the 
variables have reasonable values (i.e. not nil) before installing the 
constraint. To remove a custom constraint, delete all the methods 
and "accept" again. This will return it to its initial, unconstraining, 
state.

The Module Compiler

The Module Compiler is invoked with the "make module" menu 
command in a thing construction view. This changes the view to one 
used to specify the parts that should be externally visible after the 
module is compiled. In this view, parts to be externally visible are 
displayed normally and all other parts are shown in gray. External 
parts may be toggled by shift-clicking on them. When the external 
parts have be designated, the "compile" menu command is invoked. 
The compiler presents a picture giving feedback as it goes through 
the compilation process. Then, the view is changed back to a thing 
construction view, but now it shows the compiled module instead of 
the original thing. You may interact with this module to verify that it 
behaves correctly. The "view source" and "view module" menu 
commands can be used to switch between the source thing and the 
module compiled from it.

Warning: The Module Compiler has not been tested extensively and 
almost certainly has lingering bugs.

The Debugger

The debugger allows the user to study the constraints of a thing 
through a graphic display of the underlying constraint/dataflow 
graph. It is invoked with the "debugger" menu command in the thing 
construction view. The nodes in this constraint graph represent 
variables and the arcs represent constraints. Variables are labeled 
with their path and constraints are labeled with abbreviations 
representing their strengths.

The graph is not presented all at once but rather in independent 
subgraphs called partitions. By definition, there are no inter-
partition constraints and thus each partition behaves independently 
of all other partitions. The number of partitions is displayed in the 
upper left corner of the debugger view along with two arrows. 
Clicking on the arrows with the mouse cycles forward and backward 
through the partitions.

Constraint arcs are labeled with arrow heads to show which 
constraint method was selected by the planner for each constraint. If 
the constraint is not currently satisfied, its arc is displayed in gray. 
The debugger initially shows the dataflow graph for the current 
solution. There may be multiple, equally good solutions. These may 
be cycled through using the arrows. The first time one of the arrows 
is pressed, all solutions are computed (which may take a while) and 
then the number of solutions is displayed. Only the arrowheads and 
gray/non-gray status of the constraint arcs changes when the 
displayed solution changes.

Constraints and variables and be moved with the mouse to create a 
pleasing and readable layout. In addition, several menu commands 
help achieve a good layout. The "center constraints" command 
centers constraint labels between the constrained variables. The tails 
of constraints with only one variable, such as stay, mouse, and edit 
constraints, are made to point away from the center of the constraint 
graph in an attempt to keep them out of the way. The "layout" 
command invokes a more powerful but slower graph layout 
algorithm. The graph is redisplayed as the algorithm executes and 
the user may press and hold the mouse button to force the layout 
algorithm to terminate early.

Warning: The layout algorithm becomes very slow for large graphs. 
However, even when nicely laid out, large graphs are difficult to 
understand so perhaps some sort of modularity mechanism is needed 
to limit the amount of detail presented to the user.

5. Release Notes

This version of ThingLab II runs only on version 2.3 of Smalltalk-80 
from ParcPlace Systems. It should, however, port fairly easily to 
other standard Smalltalk-80 systems. For example, we ported an 
earlier version to Tektronix Smalltalk in half a day. Unfortunately, it 
would be difficult to port the system to Digitalk Smalltalk because in 
their system the compiler classes are not available to the end-user 
and the equation translator and module compiler construct and 
manipulate Smalltalk parse trees.

This is the second release of ThingLab II. The first release was given 
out to only a few other research laboratories. This version fixes a 
number of the bugs and limitations of the first release and improves 
performance considerably.

Although we haven't the resources to maintain ThingLab II, we are 
definitely interested in your experiences with the system, including 
bug reports and suggestions. Comments should be addressed to:

	John Maloney (jmaloney@june.cs.washington.edu)

who may also be reached at:

	Department of Computer Science and Engineering, FR-35
	University of Washington
	Seattle, WA  98195
	USA

6. References

The following are additional  references for ThingLab II. Pointers 
into the general literature on constraint programming may be found 
in each paper, although the bibliography of the CACM paper is the 
most comprehensive.

Maloney, J., Borning, A., and Freeman-Benson, B. "Constraint 
Technology for User Interface Construction in ThingLab II" In 
OOPSLA '89 Proceedings, pp. 381-388.

Freeman-Benson, B. "A Module Mechanism for Constraints in 
Smalltalk" In OOPSLA '89 Proceedings, pp. 389-396.

Freeman-Benson, B., Maloney, J., Borning, A. "The DeltaBlue 
Algorithm: An Incremental Constraint Hierarchy Solver" CACM 
33:1 (January 1989), pp. 54-63. Available in expanded form as 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering Technical Report 
89-08-06, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195.

Appendix: Installing ThingLabII

The following three files should be filed in, in order:

	ThingLabII.v2.st
	Things.v2.st
	Demos.v2.st

This will take a while, perhaps as much as an hour on some 
platforms. There is also an optional .form file to be placed in the 
same directory as your image:

	ThingLabII.form

If available, this file is used to display a humorous picture when the 
image is started.

Acknowledgements

The first version of ThingLab II was implemented from scratch by 
Bjorn Freeman-Benson and John Maloney in about four months. It 
was further developed and improved over the following year by John 
Maloney. Alan Borning acted as high-level consultant and mentor.

ThingLab II incorporates many of the ideas from Alan Borning's 
earlier constraint programming system, ThingLab, including 
constraint hierarchies, merging, and the construction-set metaphor. 
Spiritual ancestors include Gosling's thesis and Sutherland's 
ground-breaking SketchPad system.

Apple Computer provided two Macintosh II computers and a one 
year fellowship for John Maloney. IBM also supported John 
Maloney for one year. An NSF fellowship supported Bjorn 
Freeman-Benson. Additional funding was provided by NSF Grant 
No. IRI-8803294 and the Washington Technology Center. We are 
grateful to all for their support.
